# Overview
Optimization of resource to increse throughput and minimize contention. It is generally targeted to **minimize disk I/O**. Optimization is best done by analyzing what operations on which tables are **done the most**.

## Performance Parameters
Performance is affected by:
- Hardware
- Database server parameter settings
- Database Design (schema)
- Indices on Tables
- Query

## Tuning Levels
- Higher Level Database Design (schema, queries, transactions)
- Database System Parameters
- Hardware

# Index & Schema Tuning
## Indexing
Indices can be used to speed up access to desired data

## Schema Tuning
Instead of going for higher level normalization (i.e. BCNF), we might opt for lower levels that are faster, by utilizing speed in redundancies. 

# Query Tuning
You can either rewrite queries, or use optimizer hints to make the DBMS use the most optimized [PLAN](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/sql/query-execution-plan-in-sql).

# Transaction Tuning
WIP
# Hardware Tuning
Deals with minimizing I/O operations. 

## Memory Buffering
Number I/O operations, specifically *read* operations can be reduced by keeping data in memory. We can determine what data to keep in memory by considering the **break even point** between **disk access cost**, and **memory cost**.
$$
m=\frac{\text{price per disk}}{\text{price per MB memory}} \times \frac{\text{blocks per MB}}{\text{numb. of disk access}}
$$
In 1987, the break even point is at 5 minutes, which means data accessed every 5 minutes or less are worth to keep in memory. This is called the **five-minutes rule**.

The five-minute role is for *random access*, for *sequentially accessed* data it is a **one-minute rule**.

## RAID
Redundant Array of Independent Disc.
- Stripping
	Strip data accross multiple disk, so multiple disks can work in parallel.
- Redundancy
	For fault tolerance, reliability.
### RAID Levels
#### RAID 0
Strip data, resulting in fast reads. However, RAID 0 has no fault tolerance.
#### RAID 1
Mirror the data. Keep multiple copies of the same data in multiple disks (tipcally only two), for fault tolerance. However, this requires more disk and slower write time.
#### RAID 5
Store one parity data in each disk. ([read](https://www.techtarget.com/searchstorage/definition/RAID-5-redundant-array-of-independent-disks))
#### RAID 10
Combine RAID 0 and RAID 1, requiring even more disks.

### Choice of RAID Level
RAID 5 when writes are rare and data is very large, RAID 1 otherwise.
For **r** - reads and **w** - writes per second:
- RAID 1 - $r+2w$
- RAID 5 - $r+4w$
# Performance Benchmark