# Primary Indices (Clustering)
- Determine order of physical records. (i.e. when you SELECT, the data will be shown in the order of this index)
# Secondary Indices (Non-Clustering)
- Useful for retrieving single record or range of records
- Maintained separately and maintainedas changes are made to the base tables
- Tend to be much smaller than base table, much less I/O
- Rebuilding **primary index** causes automatic rebuild of this

# Criterias of Index Tuning
Indices are added for slow operations, with appropriate type. etc.

## When To Use Each Type of Index
- B+ Tree
	The default type. It takes approximately the same time to access any row. Good for high data sparsity.
- Hash
	Good for simple and fast lookup based on equality (LNAME = 'Grwna')
- Bitmap
	Used for tables with large number of rows and some column values repeat (Low data sparsity).

## When Should Index Be Considered?
Good candidates for index
- Unique Index
- Foreign Keys
- Columns frequently referenced in **ORDER BY** and **GROUP BY**
- Where **MAX** or **MIN** is applied
- Columns with **high number of unique values**

Index is good when data in columns are frequently accessed, or used to build joins.

Avoid index on:
- Small tables
- If many index is required for it to be logical
- Columns with high number of **NULL** values
- Frequently manipulated columns

Tips:
- Rebuild index often
- Gather statistics
- Dont overuse index
- Only for columns that return few records
- Bitmap for low variety (male-female, active-inactive, etc.)